We conclude that in hospitals where there is no pediatric cardiovascular surgeon or interventional cardiologist, the surgical correction of the PDA can be carried out by a general pediatric surgeon. The technique is reproducible, easy to perform and with minimal complications.
Se incluyeron 224 pacientes divididos en dos grupos: grupo I, con 184 (82%) recién nacidos, y grupo II, con 40 (18%) niños grandes de 2 meses a 8 años de edad. A todos se les realizó cierre quirúrgico: 3 por toracoscopía y 221 por toracotomía posterolateral izquierda. Presentaron complicaciones 36 pacientes, lo que representa el 16% del total; solo el 5.3% fueron complicaciones mayores. Fallecieron 24 pacientes en el posoperatorio, lo que representa una mortalidad del 10.7%; ninguno falleció por complicaciones transquirúrgicas. El CAP es un defecto cardíaco congénito que se presenta en alto porcentaje en pacientes prematuros. El cierre farmacológico es el principal tratamiento por tener excelentes resultados en recién nacidos; sin embargo, en aquellos casos en los que no sea posible está indicado el cierre quirúrgico. Todos los pacientes fueron operados por cirujanos pediatras generales, con una sobrevida global del 92%.
En los hospitales donde no hay cirujano cardiovascular pediátrico ni cardiólogo intervencionista, la corrección quirúrgica del CAP puede ser llevada a cabo por un cirujano pediatra. La técnica es reproducible, fácil de realizar y con mínimas complicaciones.
Evaluar la eficacia y la seguridad del cierre quirúrgico del CAP por cirujanos pediatras sin especialidad en cirugía cardiovascular.
This study was conducted at the West General Hospital, a 2nd level public hospital, with the diagnosis of patent ductus arteriosus that required surgical correction. For the collection of the information, the files from January 2001 to December 2018 were retrospectively reviewed.
The Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA) is congenital heart defect and is considered a public health problem. It occurs in a high percentage of newborns and in some older than 1 month. Pharmacological closure is the preferred initial treatment, as it has had excellent results; however, in those cases where it is not possible, surgical closure is indicated.
The objective is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the surgical closure of the patent PDA when it is carried out by pediatric surgeons without specialization in cardiovascular surgery.
224 patients were included; divided into two groups: Group I: 184 (82%) “newborns” and Group II: 40 (18%) “big children” with ages from 2 months to 8 years. All had a surgical closure; 3 by thoracoscopy and 221 by left posterolateral thoracotomy. 36 patients presented complications representing 16% of the total of patients, only 5.3% were major complications. 24 patients died in the postoperative period, representing a mortality of 10.7%, none died due to trans-surgical complications. PDA is a congenital heart defect that occurs in a high percentage of premature patients. The pharmacological closure is the principal treatment because it has had excellent results in newborns; however, in those cases where it is not possible, surgical closure it´s indicated. All patients were operated by general pediatric surgeons, with a global survival of 92%.
Ensayo clínico realizado en pacientes del Hospital General de Occidente, centro hospitalario público de segundo nivel, con diagnóstico de CAP, que requirieron corrección quirúrgica. Se revisaron en forma retrospectiva los expedientes de enero de 2001 a diciembre de 2018.
El conducto arterioso permeable (CAP) es un defecto cardiaco congénito y se considera un problema de salud pública. Se presenta en un alto porcentaje de recién nacidos y en algunos mayores de 1 mes. El cierre farmacológico es el tratamiento inicial preferido, ya que ha tenido excelentes resultados; sin embargo, en aquellos casos en los que no es posible, está indicado el cierre quirúrgico.

